JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is on
assignment.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
REP. KEVIN MCCARTHY (R-CA),
House Majority Leader: If we're
going to unite and be strong,
we need a new face
to help do that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A House divided.
Republicans scramble to find a
new leader after Kevin
McCarthy drops out of the race
to replace John Boehner as
speaker of the House of
Representatives.
Also ahead this Thursday:
Attorney General Loretta Lynch
tells Gwen the Department of
Justice needs to start keeping
records on police shootings.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: We find it unacceptable
that we don't have national,
consistent data about not just
excessive force, but
officer-involved deaths,
officer-involved
shootings.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the former
Chairman of the Federal Reserve
Bank Ben Bernanke opens
up about his new book, the
global financial meltdown seven
years ago, and who should have
taken the fall.
BEN BERNANKE, Former Federal
Reserve Chairman: Corporations
are legal fictions. They don't
themselves take legal or illegal
actions. It's individuals who
make those decisions.
And I would have preferred to
have seen the strategy been to
go and determine who -- what
individuals were responsible.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The political
bombshell burst at the U.S.
Capitol just after midday. House
Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy
abruptly withdrew from the race
for speaker, a contest he had
once been favored to win.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins has spent the day at
the Capitol, and she begins our
reporting.
REP. KEVIN MCCARTHY (R-CA),
House Majority Leader: I think I
shocked some of you, huh?
LISA DESJARDINS: With that
understatement, Kevin McCarthy
shook the corridors of Congress
today. House Republicans had
gathered to choose their nominee
for speaker when the majority
leader stunned them. He said
later the party is simply too
divided.
REP. KEVIN MCCARTHY: I think
there's something to be said,
for us to unite, we probably
need
a fresh face. I'll stay on as
majority leader, but the one
thing I have found talking with
everybody, if we're going to
unite and be strong, we need a
new face to help do that.
LISA DESJARDINS: The news set
off a scramble in the hallways.
The five-term California
congressman was the front-runner
for speaker, but seemed short
the 218 votes needed in a
full House vote.
REP. KEVIN MCCARTHY: If we're
going to be strong, we have got
to be 100 percent united.
LISA DESJARDINS: McCarthy ran
afoul of the same conservatives,
the House Freedom Caucus,
who helped push out Speaker John
Boehner. Yesterday, the group's
roughly 40 members
endorsed Daniel
Webster of Florida.
Congressman Tim Huelskamp of
Kansas is a Freedom Caucus
member.
REP. TIM HUELSKAMP (R), Kansas:
Clearly, the establishment lost
today; 80 percent of -- 80
percent of Americans --
Republicans wanted to get a new
speaker. And I think that's
obviously
going to happen. But K Street's
got to be shaking now. They have
lost two speakers in
two weeks.
LISA DESJARDINS: The decision
leaves an already fractious
House Republican Party even
deeper
in disarray.
Utah Congressman Jason Chaffetz
is also in the speaker's race.
REP. JASON CHAFFETZ (R), Utah: I
really do believe it's time for
a fresh start. That
was the whole genesis of my
campaign. But we need to have a
lot more family discussion,
because we need to find somebody
that our whole body can unite
behind and do what we
were elected to do.
LISA DESJARDINS: Some centrist
Republicans who had backed
Boehner and then McCarthy now
say finding the next speaker may
even require reaching across the
aisle to secure votes
from Democrats.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa is on
Capitol Hill now with the
latest.
Lisa, what a day. What are you
hearing about how this all gets
resolved?
LISA DESJARDINS: Well, the next
thing -- everyone, set your
watches -- 9:00 a.m., House
Republicans
are set to meet again tomorrow.
But, Judy, a new name is
emerging tonight, a familiar
name, Paul Ryan, Republican of
Wisconsin, chairman of the House
Ways and Means Committee. There
is tremendous pressure
on him tonight, including
perhaps from Speaker Boehner's
office itself, for Paul Ryan to
get into the race.
So far, he has not done that.
But in talking to sources both
conservative and moderate
in the Republican Party, there
is thought tonight, Judy, that
he might be the only current
House Republican who could get
the votes needed to be speaker.
Other than that, I think a
couple other things to notice
about a possible plan B, Judy,
if
Ryan doesn't do it, perhaps
Speaker Boehner stays on the
job. And then a plan C, Judy,
that's where we are, there is
also talk of perhaps nominating
a caretaker speaker, someone
who does the job short-term,
until the next president is
elected.
And with that scenario, almost
Aaron Sorkin on steroids, there
is truck of perhaps getting
someone outside of Congress to
come in as a caretaker speaker.
Some were musing about
Mitt Romney. I don't know if
that's feasible. But it really
seems it's Romney's running
mate, Paul Ryan, who's getting
the attention tonight.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sounds like
something from a Hollywood
movie.
Lisa Desjardins, we thank you.
And we will explore the
political dynamics of what
happened today, and what comes
next,
after the news summary.
On another front, members of
Congress went after Volkswagen
today over the way it rigged
diesel models to cheat on
emissions tests. Statements at a
House hearing ranged from
fury to apology.
William Brangham has the story.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The opening
statements were full of
indignation from both sides of
the
aisle.
REP. FRED UPTON (R), Michigan:
V.W. has betrayed a nation, a
nation of regulators, loyalists,
suppliers and
innocent customers.
REP. JAN SCHAKOWSKY (D),
Illinois: The American people,
the EPA and their counterparts
around
the world have been
defrauded by Volkswagen.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Michael Horn,
the automaker's top U.S.
executive, answered with a
corporate
measles culpa.
MICHAEL HORN, CEO, Volkswagen of
America: On behalf of our
company, my colleagues in
Germany and me personally, I
would like to offer a sincere
apology for Volkswagen's use
of a software program that
served to defeat the regular
emissions testing regime.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Horn also said
he believes there was never a
corporate decision to cheat.
MICHAEL HORN: To my best
knowledge today, the corporation
in no board meeting or no
supervisory board meeting has
authorized this, that this was a
couple of software engineers
who put this in for
whatever reasons.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But Republican
Chris Collins of New York was
having none of that.
REP. CHRIS COLLINS (R), New
York: V.W.'s trying to get the
United States of America to
believe
these are a couple of rogue
engineers? I categorically
reject that. Either your entire
organization
is incompetent when it comes to
trying to come up with
intellectual property -- and
I don't believe that for a
second -- or they are complicit
at the highest levels in a
massive
cover-up that continues today.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Horn was also
challenged over V.W.'s plans to
fix the estimated 500,000
affected vehicles in the U.S. He
suggested it could take one to
two years, and said the
fixes might affect engine
performance, but not fuel
efficiency.
New York Democrat Paul Tonko
complained, that's cold comfort
to V.W. owners.
REP. PAUL TONKO (D), New York:
Consumers, including people in
my district, purchased
a car believing it would be a
clean, environmentally friendly
choice. Worse still, the resale
value
on these vehicles, which I'm
sure was a selling point, has
certainly been destroyed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For now,
Volkswagen has stopped selling
the affected models and has
withdrawn applications to
certify that the company's 2016
versions meet U.S. standards.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The Volkswagen
CEO also said the automaker will
compensate U.S. dealers
for any losses they incur.
Russia fired more cruise
missiles into Syria today, and
said they hit Islamic State
targets.
The Russian military released
new video of the strikes, and it
denied U.S. reports that
several missiles
crashed in Iran.
Meanwhile, in Brussels, at a
NATO meeting, U.S. Defense
Secretary Ashton Carter
complained
Moscow is acting recklessly,
in a variety of ways.
ASHTON CARTER, U.S. Defense
Secretary: They have shot cruise
missiles from a ship in the
Caspian Sea without warning.
They have come within just a few
miles of one of our unmanned
aerial vehicles. They have
initiated a joint ground
offensive with the Syrian
regime, shattering
the facade that they are
there to fight ISIL.
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the NATO
meeting, Turkey called Russia's
buildup in Syria unacceptable,
and NATO agreed to send troops
to defend Turkey if asked.
The European Union moved today
toward a tougher approach to its
migrant crisis. E.U. interior
ministers agreed on stepped-up
deportations of those who don't
quality for asylum. They
also discussed creating a new
force to police Europe's
external borders. We will hear
how
Sweden is coping with the
influx later in the program.
The American commander in
Afghanistan has told Congress
that most Taliban militants
are open to making peace
with the Afghan government.
Army General John Campbell
offered that assessment today at
a hearing of the House Armed
Services
Committee. Current plans call
for withdrawing all but about
1,000 U.S. troops from
Afghanistan
by year's end. Campbell warned
that that would limit any
capability to train Afghan
forces,
but he declined to say that he
-- what he's recommending to the
president.
The stampede at last month's
Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca may
have killed far more people than
Saudi Arabia has acknowledged.
The Associated Press reported
today that data from 18
countries
shows more than 1,360 dead. The
Saudis have maintained the
official toll is 769.
The head of soccer's
international governing body
will face a 90-day suspension.
FIFA imposed
that penalty today on longtime
president Sepp Blatter. He is at
the center of a corruption
probe and had already planned to
step down next February. Michel
Platini, who is the
head of European soccer's
governing group, was also
suspended.
An investigative journalist and
author from Belarus has won this
year's Nobel Prize for
Literature. Svetlana Alexievich
was honored for her portrayal of
life in the former Soviet
Union, including World War II,
the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan, and the Chernobyl
nuclear disaster. Alexievich
learned of her selection today
in Minsk, the capital of
Belarus.
SVETLANA ALEXIEVICH, Nobel Prize
Winner (through translator):
This is not only a prize for
me, but a prize I think as a
whole for our culture, for our
small country, which, all
the time, throughout its history
and now as well has been between
some millstones. It
always has been pressed
from all sides.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Alexievich is
only the 14th woman to win the
literature award since 1901.
Wall Street kept up its weeklong
advance today, as oil prices
rose again. The Dow Jones
industrial
average gained 138 points to
close at 17050. The Nasdaq rose
19 points, and the S&P 500
added 17.
And renowned Cajun chef Paul
Prudhomme has died. He achieved
national and then global
fame in the 1980s and
popularized spicy Louisiana
cuisine, including gumbo and
jambalaya. At
one point, his K-Paul's
Louisiana Kitchen was the most
popular restaurant in New
Orleans.
Paul Prudhomme was 75 years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
more on Kevin McCarthy's
decision to bow out of the race
for speaker of the U.S. House;
Gwen's conversation with
Attorney General Loretta Lynch;
Ben Bernanke
on who should have taken the
fall for the financial crisis,
and much more.
We take a deeper look now at
today's surprise shakeup on
Capitol Hill with former
Republican
House member Vin Weber of
Minnesota and Washington Post
reporter Mike DeBonis.
Gentlemen, welcome.
Mike DeBonis, to you first.
Anything to add about why
Kevin McCarthy pulled out?
MIKE DEBONIS, The Washington
Post: Really, right now, you
know, it was a matter of pure
politics within the House
Republican Conference.
It became clear that his path to
the speakership was going to be
very narrow, and that his
ascending to that post would do
little, if anything, to solve
the internal problems and
the divides within the
conference. He said it himself
at his press conference earlier
today, when he stood before the
microphones and said, we need a
fresh face.
The question is -- he was the
fresh face of the Republican
Party for so many years, for
at least the last five years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MIKE DEBONIS: He was one of the
young guns in a class with
people like Eric Cantor and
Paul Ryan.
Eric Cantor, of course, was
kicked unceremoniously out of
Congress last year by a Tea
Party challenger.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
MIKE DEBONIS: And now people are
looking to Paul Ryan. So, who is
going to step up in
this next generation? That's
really what we're looking at
now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, it is the
case, Vin Weber, he was the
fresh face. Something changed,
though, just in the
last 12, 24 hours.
VIN WEBER, Former U.S.
Congressman: Well, something
changed.
I think the main thing, as we
just talked about, is the fact
that they didn't -- Kevin
would have won the nomination of
our caucus. And it's important
for our viewers to understand.
That's what we were doing. We
were nominating a candidate. We
were not choosing a speaker.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
VIN WEBER: The question was,
when he then proceeded to the
full House of Representatives,
would he get the majority that
was necessary to be elected
speaker? He wasn't sure he could
get to the majority to
be elected speaker.
And, most important, there was
no plan B. If he failed to get
the majority, who would
happen on the next ballot? Would
they go outside the Congress?
Would they try to form a
coalition
with the Democrats? There was no
plan B, and so it would have
resulted in chaos, so they
decided to put everything off.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it was an
issue with the most conservative
members, is that right,
the so-called Freedom Caucus.
Those were the votes that he
needed that were not sure.
VIN WEBER: Yes, that's true. And
the only addition I would put on
that is, we really
have redefined what it
means to be conservative.
There are not big ideological,
issue-oriented differences
between those folks and the --
quote,
unquote -- "establishment." We
have defined conservative to be
a non-ideological term.
It's about strategy, it's about
tactics. Are we willing to shut
down the government, are
we going to confront the
president more directly? That's
very different.
You think about battles in the
past that divided parties, the
Democrats over civil war and
the Vietnam War in the '70s, the
Republicans fighting about tax
cuts and supply-side economics.
Those were big philosophical
issues. There is no big
philosophical divide in the
Republican
Party right now.
It's frustration at their
inability to change things with
Barack Obama in the White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Mike DeBonis,
how do they get around that?
You mentioned the speaker,
Speaker John Boehner, is trying
to get Paul Ryan to run. How do
they get around it, if it's now
about strategy and not about
philosophy?
MIKE DEBONIS: Well, right now,
they're really looking at this
Hail Mary pass and hoping
that Paul Ryan does agree, under
immense pressure from all sides
of his party, to be the guy
to come in and bring everybody
together and move forward.
If Paul Ryan sticks by his
previous refusal, citing his
young family, citing his desire
to stay as Ways and Means
chairman, it's really hard to
see what happens next. You know,
one
of the possibilities is that,
you know, John Boehner is
basically forced to stay in the
post because there is nobody
willing to replace him.
There has been talk of some sort
of caretaker speaker, a member
who perhaps is retiring
or is in his twilight -- his or
her twilight years of there
service in Congress who can
come in and do that. But I think
that the same people who were
not excited about Kevin
McCarthy aren't going to be
excited someone like a John
Kline or a Tom Cole or somebody
like that coming in and
playing that role.
So, it's really hard
to see how this ends.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vin Weber, can
you imagine something like that,
somebody from the outside
coming in?
VIN WEBER: It's highly unlikely.
This has really never happened.
The notion of my good friend and
fellow Minnesotan John Kline is
a little different. He's a
sitting
member of Congress. He's
announced he's not going to run
again, and so it would allow
us to have a respected man in
the speaker's chair for the next
year or so, while they
sorted all of this out.
I still think it's unlikely. I
think that they are going to
find somebody to be elected
speaker, but it's an unusual
time. Paul Ryan seems to be the
one person that could unite
the conference. I know him very
well. He's been a close friend
for over 20 years. He
doesn't want to do it, and he
doesn't want to do it for all of
the best reasons, Judy.
He wants to be chairman of the
Ways and Means Committee and do
tax reform and trade and
health care reform and all sorts
of other issues that he cares
about. And in his mind,
it's giving up something very,
very important. And the people
that appeal to him based on
his own self-interest and
ambitions are singing the wrong
tune for Paul Ryan. That's not
why
he would do this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He
would do it why?
VIN WEBER: He would do it if he
is convinced that the
institution of the House of
Representatives,
the Republican Party and
ultimately the country are
hurting by this chaos in the
House and
he's the only person that
can mend the fences.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just for a
moment, Vin Weber, broaden this
out. What does this say about
the health and the future of
your party, the Republican
Party?
VIN WEBER: Well, the party is in
a certain degree of chaos right
now and there is a similarly,
in my view anyway, between what
we see in the presidential
nominating process and what
we see going on in the House
of Representatives today.
And I do think it extends even
beyond the Republican Party to
the broader electorate.
People are angry. They're not
happy with the status quo. They
want a change, but they're
not sure what that change should
be. That's what I see in the
House of Representatives.
It's what I see in the Donald
Trump candidacy, who has all
sorts of people that are angry
and want to move in a
different direction.
But Trump does not identify --
this is no disrespect to him,
but he doesn't identify
any clear direction for the
country. He's just got a series
of attitudes. That reflects
where the country is right now.
And let me make one more point.
At the moment, that's
not good for Republicans. It's
chaos in the House and
unpredictability in our
presidential
race.
But the notion that the country
is mad about the status quo and
the direction we're headed
ultimately isn't good for the
Democrats either. They have the
White House. They are the status
quo.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it
certainly is a day that's left
everybody stunned.
VIN WEBER: Yes. There's not many
days that really are
unprecedented, but, at least in
our lifetimes, this is
pretty unprecedented.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vin Weber, former
member of Congress, thank you
for joining us.
Mike DeBonis from The Washington
Post, we thank you both.
MIKE DEBONIS: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Loretta Lynch is
the country's top law
enforcement official. She faces
a
spike in violent crime in
several major U.S. cities and
police-involved shootings,
sparking
a national outcry for more
accountability and transparency.
Gwen sat down with the attorney
general at the Justice
Department earlier today to
discuss
the federal government's
role in addressing all this.
GWEN IFILL: Madam Attorney
General, thank you so much for
talking with us.
LORETTA LYNCH, U.S. Attorney
General: Thank you for having
me.
GWEN IFILL: I want to start by
talking about the subject which
has consumed so much of
your time since you have been
attorney general, this whole
question of violent crimes.
You have been meeting with
communities around the country,
here in Washington as well, and
talking about the degree to
which a lot of cities say that
violent homicides, crimes
have spiked in their
communities, yet your own FBI
statistics show a slight
decline.
How do you square
these two things?
LORETTA LYNCH: Well, I think the
issue of the day really is, how
do we protect the American
people?
Certainly, crime overall is
down, and in many of our major
cities, crime is down. But in
some neighborhoods, crime is not
only entrenched. We have seen a
rise in certain types of violent
crime. It's a matter of great
concern for those of us here at
the department.
What I initially did in this
regard was direct my U.S.
attorneys to meet with their
local
counterparts, people on the
ground, to talk about the causes
of the crime, the nature
of the crime, what
were they seeing.
GWEN IFILL: I feel like we have
had a lot of conversations about
this, and, in the end,
I'm not sure I know which is
true, is it getting worse or is
it getting better?
LORETTA LYNCH: I think it
depends upon how you're impacted
by crime, but certainly the
loss of every life
diminishes all of us.
So, whether you're in the
neighborhood that has these
rising numbers or whether you're
not, if someone in your city, if
one of your neighbors, if your
fellow Americans are feeling
this, then it really is
impacting all of us and it is a
matter of concern for the
department.
GWEN IFILL: I know you have
spent a lot of time in the
communities affected, in
particular
by police-involved shootings.
Yesterday, your FBI director,
James Comey, said he found it
ridiculous that the Department
of Justice had not been keeping
its own records on the number of
police-involved shootings,
that this has been left to
news media organizations.
Why is it that the Justice
Department hasn't been on top of
that?
LORETTA LYNCH: Well, certainly,
I think it's a serious issue. We
find it unacceptable that
we don't have national,
consistent data about not just
excessive force, but
officer-involved
deaths, officer-involved
shootings.
This information is important
because, with it, we can
pinpoint trends, we can look at
how situations devolve from a
standard interaction into one
that's less positive or perhaps
fatal.
And we can provide assistance
and guidance to police and to
communities.
We actually do mandate a lot of
this. When the Department of
Justice enters into a consent
decree with the police
department, or in many instances
when we work with departments as
part of our collaborative reform
process, we do require that type
of data, but it's
not consistent.
Every department handles data in
different ways, records data in
different ways. So,
we have said that this is
important, it's vital. It's
actually unacceptable that we
don't have it. And what we're
right now is going further.
GWEN IFILL: OK.
I want to talk to you more
broadly about whether you think
we're coming as a society or as
a government to some sort of
agreement on the concerns about
criminal justice reform
and mass incarceration. I'm sure
you read the long, long story
Ta-Nehisi Coates wrote
in "The Atlantic" about the
spread of mass incarceration.
And it seems to be an increasing
topic as Capitol Hill as well.
Are we reaching a point where we
can agree on what the solutions
are?
LORETTA LYNCH: I think we're at
a unique time in American
history and American dialogue,
where we had this bipartisan
moment, a recognition that the
way in which we have been trying
to keep people safe has, in
fact, had, in some situations,
the opposite impact.
And certainly it's had
collateral consequences in
removing young men, particularly
young
men of color, from their
communities at a time when they
need to be there and their
communities need them the most.
I was a young prosecutor in the
'90s, and I remember the days of
violence in the gun
trade and the concern that
people had when they were
passing these strict mandatory
minimum
laws. At the time, that was the
thinking, that this is the way
in which we can protect
people. And we have seen
the results of that.
We have seen that when we lock
up nonviolent drug offenders,
particularly those who are
struggling with addiction, that
it doesn't really affect the
safety of the community,
but it has a devastating impact
on the lives of those young
people.
GWEN IFILL: And so this week,
one of the things you suggested
was release -- the beginning
of a series of releases,
starting with 6,000 prisoners
who have been held, you believe,
too long.
That's a drop in the bucket
against the 2.2 million people
who are held in federal and
local jails and prisons.
How do you expand on that?
LORETTA LYNCH: Well, the
sentencing reform efforts that
are on the Hill, I think, are
very encouraging.
The Senate came out with a bill
just last week. I believe the
House is announcing their
bill today. We look forward to
reviewing those and working with
both houses to make them
not only effective, but
productive in a way that keeps
our communities safe and also
gives
people a chance at rebuilding
their lives, because that can be
done.
And I think this debate and this
discussion is important. When we
talk about not just
people coming out on early
release -- and those individuals
coming out soon are being
released because the sentencing
commission has tried to
essentially ameliorate the harsh
impact of the stricter crack
laws relative to the cocaine
laws.
And that change was accepted,
and after judicial review, a
number of inmates will have
their
sentences reduced.
GWEN IFILL: How does that take
into account the fact that
two-thirds of the people who
are released end up back
in jail three years later?
LORETTA LYNCH: That is the next
part in this conversation.
And, frankly, it is just as
vital and important a part as
how we deal with the sentences
at
the front end. Providing the
support and providing a way for
people to reintegrate back into
their communities is key. We
also work with the Federal
Reentry Council, which is a
multiagency
task force across government to
look at a whole host of barriers
to reintegration.
Housing, for example, is a major
concern for those coming out of
our criminal justice system,
the ability simply to go home.
What so many of us take for
granted at the end of the day
is a challenge when
you are incarcerated.
So, we're looking at making sure
that the rules are consistent,
that people who are
eligible to return particularly
to public housing are able to do
so, so that families
can come together again.
GWEN IFILL: Since you have been
attorney general, and probably
predated your service, we have
been in a series of
conversations about these
issues, about criminal justice
and about incarceration,
and it all ties in with race and
about police-involved shootings.
Are we turning the corner on
those conversations or are we
stuck in a corner, especially
when
race becomes the common thread?
LORETTA LYNCH: Well, I think
we're in the middle of a
conversation, but it's a
conversation
that I think we should
look at as an opportunity.
This is an opportunity for many
people in this country to have a
discussion about race,
about criminal justice, about
the world of government in
general. And I think we have
to broaden the discussion, not
just around issues of race and
policing, but race and
society and communities that
don't have the educational
support, the economic support,
the health care support to give
residents, particularly young
people, opportunity to
break that cycle.
I will tell you, one of the most
exciting things that happens is
when you go to an institution
and you're talking about reentry
programs with young men who are
incarcerated there,
and they talk about how the fact
that if they are able to get an
education while they are
incarcerated, they feel they can
break a cycle and release their
children from a path that
they were on, that maybe they
followed their own parents down
as well.
So, we're looking at this at a
larger sense, and I think -- my
hope is that this conversation
can be larger and that it can
really just inspire all of us.
GWEN IFILL: Attorney General
Loretta Lynch, thank you very
much for joining us.
LORETTA LYNCH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke
on who is to blame for the
financial
crisis seven years ago; plus,
new online tools to understand
inequality.
But, first, Sweden has received
more refugees per capita than
any other European country,
and the government is proud
of its open-door policy.
But, as special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports from
Sweden, the country's generosity
has left it struggling to cope
with an influx that's far
greater than anticipated.
MALCOLM BRABANT:
Twenty-one-year-old student Abed
Allmugharbel has found sanctuary
in the
historic town of Ystad, a
continent away from Homs in
Syria, where his home and much
of
the city has been destroyed.
Sweden's offer of granting
asylum to all Syrian refugees
was irresistible.
ABED ALLMUGHARBEL, Refugee: I
never imagined myself outside of
Homs city. Now I'm from
Sweden -- I'm in Sweden. It's
very happy to be in a very
peaceful country, where I'm
being
treated like a human, respect to
human life. Very friendly people
here. It's very happy
to be here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: We first
encountered Abed last month in
the Turkish coastal city of
Izmir, where smugglers arranged
passage to Europe. On that day,
Abed had just met a trafficker
who had promised to
get him to Greece.
ABED ALLMUGHARBEL: It might be
my best day or might be my
salvation day.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Thankfully for
Abed, it was his salvation day,
but for hundreds of others,
such deals are death sentences.
Abed's odyssey to Sweden from
Lebanon took 17 days and cost
$2,500. He sailed from Tripoli
in Lebanon to Mersin in Turkey
and then traveled to the
people-smuggling center of Izmir
next
to the Aegean Sea.
An overcrowded inflatable
carried him and other migrants
to the Greek island of Lesbos.
From there, he took a ferry to
Athens, and then a bus to the
Macedonian border. All the
way, his path and that of tens
of thousands of others was
facilitated by the U.N. Refugee
Agency through border crossings
in Serbia, Croatia, Hungary and
Austria.
Eventually, he reached Bavaria,
where he was told by the Germans
that he could apply for
asylum or carry on. Abed
continued his journey north to
Hamburg and onto the Baltic port
of Sassnitz, where he took a
ship that enabled him to bypass
Denmark and landed in Trelleborg
in Southern Sweden. And there he
began the process of claiming
asylum.
The most perilous part of Abed's
odyssey was the crossing to
Lesbos. The legal ferry takes
just under an hour and costs
about $30. Abed paid $1,200 for
a place in a crowded inflatable
whose engine broke down halfway
across and started to leak.
ABED ALLMUGHARBEL: After like 25
minutes, under the engine, there
was a hole. The hole
was getting the water in the
boat. You can imagine how a
woman can scream of --
frightening,
of how children can
scream of being afraid.
Yes, at that point, we thought
we are going to die. Happily,
the boat made it to the shore.
I don't want to go through this
suffering all again. I don't
wish it for anyone, even
my enemy. But there was no other
way. I had to take this way to
get to here.
MALCOLM BRABANT: He promises to
give something back to a country
which has taken the moral
high ground over Europe's
migration crisis, but is
struggling to cope.
WOMAN (through translator): And
398, 399, very big family, many
people. Can I see? Oh,
that's perfect.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This is a
registration center in
Gothenburg, Sweden's second
city. The system
is straining at the seams, as
genuine refugees and economic
migrants alike seize the
opportunity
for a new life.
The numbers coming into Sweden
far exceed those anticipated by
the government. The latest
figures today show that, in the
past seven days, there have been
8,300 people who have
applied for asylum. Now, during
the course of a whole month,
that amounts to more than
30,000 people. Over three
months, it equates to 1 percent
of the whole Swedish population.
The head of the migration board
says, we're coming to the end of
the road. Sweden regards
itself as the humanitarian
conscience of the world and
there is genuine pride that the
country is trying to provide the
newcomers with a soft landing.
But the sheer volume
of asylum seekers has taken
the authorities by surprise.
WOMAN: We are working from 8:00
in the morning to 7:30 p.m. in
the evening seven days a week
now.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Do you see an
increase in the numbers coming
or is it dying down?
WOMAN: It's an increase. It's
getting more and more every day.
Last week, we had 250
altogether. Now we have 310 with
them. So, it's getting more,
more and more people.
MALCOLM BRABANT: And how do
you anticipate it will grow?
WOMAN: I think it will get
higher for a couple of weeks,
and then maybe slowly getting
fewer
seeking protection because of
the weather situation in
Southern Europe.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Haidar, a
22-year-old videographer from
Iraq, is one of the newest
arrivals.
He spent time in Mosul occupied
by the so-called Islamic State
and recently escaped from
kidnappers.
He asked not to be identified.
HAIDAR, Refugee: I am grateful
for the Sweden -- for Sweden
people and for the government,
because they are opening their
doors for us, because we had no
home, no nothing. We don't
have money. We don't have a
home. We don't have a place to
go. So, we are so grateful
for them.
MALCOLM BRABANT: In Trelleborg,
a small port town with direct
ferry links to Germany, the
local council is struggling to
accommodate a surge in
unaccompanied minors, mainly
boys
aged under 18 from Afghanistan.
MAN: In my country (INAUDIBLE)
MALCOLM BRABANT: In the past
week, Trelleborg has taken in
almost 1,000 children, which
represents a 2 percent increase
in the town's population.
CECILIA LEJON, Trelleborg: Oh,
it was another world before.
Before, we had, like, two new
kids every week, and we thought
that that was really a lot. We
thought that was a pressure
on Trelleborg. And now there are
100 a day. So, we have got some
new perspective on this.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Her deputy,
Patrik Mullerstrom, is having to
be inventive to try to find
enough
places to accommodate the
unaccompanied minors.
PATRIK MULLERSTROM, Trelleborg:
We have people working on
getting properties for new
housings.
And they're looking at every
single housing in the city, old
abandoned offices, like this,
the museum. We're staying away
from school gymnasiums, because
we don't want to disrupt
the regular city activities. But
we're really looking around.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Malmo, Sweden's
third city, is seeing the
biggest influx. This is a magnet
for newcomers because the city
already has a large migrant
population.
And again here, the council is
trying to find shelter for 1,000
unaccompanied minors and
is competing with the migration
board to find accommodation.
Center-right economist Tino
Sanandaji, originally from
Iranian Kurdistan, is highly
critical
of the Social Democrat
government's open-door policy.
TINO SANANDAJI, Economist: I
think it's quite disastrous, and
especially if it continues.
If it continues, this is an
irreversible social experiment
that no wealthy state has ever
attempted. And there is a
palpable sense of crisis, but
there is really almost no ideas
or visions and so on about
how this can be solved.
They're just sort of postponing
it to the future. And,
temporarily, they are using,
I would argue, politically
correct spin to calm the public.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Sweden's
immigration minister, Morgan
Johansson, wasn't available for
interview
this week, but I spoke to
him just over a month ago.
What do you say to those people
who think that your immigration
policy, your open-door
policy, is naive?
MORGAN JOHANSSON, Swedish
Immigration Minister: I say that
this is -- we are now suffering
from one of the worst
humanitarian crises in our time,
seeing the people running,
fleeing
from Syria, over 12 million
people, from the war.
And I would say, if you say like
that, if you put it like that,
just turn on your television
set and see for yourself what
these people are fleeing from.
We, as a country, has an
obligation to help.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The government
has acknowledged that Sweden
will have to implement
extraordinary
measures. It forecasts a
difficult autumn, although it
insists the country can cope.
In Ystad, Abed has a message
for worried Swedes.
ABED ALLMUGHARBEL: I hope one
day to go back to Syria when the
war is over. Everyone here
will hope -- hoping -- is hoping
to go back to Syria when the war
is over.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Abed hopes to
be an asset to Sweden. But
amongst the growing number
of skeptics, there is a fear
that many of his fellow
newcomers will be a drain on
society.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Sweden.
JUDY WOODRUFF: He took on
perhaps the most important job
in the financial world a year
before a global
economic collapse.
Former Federal Reserve Chairman
Ben Bernanke reflects on that
turbulent time in a new book,
"The Courage to Act: A Memoir
of a Crisis and Its Aftermath."
Ben Bernanke, welcome
to the program.
BEN BERNANKE, Former Federal
Reserve Chairman: Thank you for
inviting me.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you write in
this remarkable book that takes
us inside not only your life,
inside the Fed, a place we don't
hear about very often, that if
you and your colleagues
had not acted as you did in
2008, that we could have seen
something like 1929 again.
Do you really believe
that might have happened?
BEN BERNANKE: Well, nobody can
know for sure, but, as an
academic, I studied the Great
Depression.
I studied how financial panics
affect the economy. And I was
very concerned about that,
you know, even before Lehman
Brothers, even before the
financial panic hit its peak.
But after Lehman Brothers, and
when the financial panic
accelerated, we saw just a
tremendous
drop-off in the economy, as
sharp as the beginning of the
Great Depression. So, I really
do believe
that it would have been a very,
very serious and protracted
downturn if the financial crisis
had not been arrested.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, the title --
in the title is "The Courage to
Act."
But I guess one question is, did
you and your colleagues really
have a choice? If things
were about to fall apart, what
else could you have done?
BEN BERNANKE: Well, the title
refers to policy-makers around
the world.
It was a very chaotic situation,
a very scary situation, big,
high-stakes decisions and
in a very uncertain and
politically difficult
environment. And people --
policy-makers could
have been passive. That was what
some commentators were urging,
for example, that we should just
step back and let the
market take care of it.
So it was very difficult to do
that. And I'm glad to have been
part of a Fed and Treasury
team that took the
action that was needed.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the goals
of what happened was to make
sure there would no longer be
this concept of too big to fail.
But a lot of people look at this
today and they say the banks
have just gotten big, big,
bigger in the ensuing seven
years. And the sort of cynical
view is, look, if one of these
big banks went under, the
government would have to bail
them out again. Is that really
where we are again?
BEN BERNANKE: Well, too big to
fail remains an issue, but we're
making progress, I think.
First of all, with the
post-crisis reforms, banks have
to hold a lot more capital, that
is to say, be less levered, hold
more equity than they did before
the crisis. And so it
would take a lot more to put a
big bank on the verge of
failure. That's the first thing.
Second thing, the big banks are
under much tighter supervision
now and being watched
more carefully than they were.
And, finally, Dodd-Frank gave
the regulators the power,
the tools to disassemble a big
bank or a big financial
institution in a way that didn't
bring down the rest of
the financial system.
And we're already seeing that
some of the big banks are --
their credit ratings are
being reduced, because the
credit rating agencies say they
can no longer count on
government
help. So, I wouldn't say the
problem is solved, by any means,
but it's very much in the --
under
the radar, and it's being paid
attention to and progress is
being made there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A lot of
conversation this week, Ben
Bernanke, about whether
financial
executives should have gone to
jail. You have been asked about
it. What do you think?
BEN BERNANKE: Well, what I was
saying there was, I was making a
comment on the Department
of Justice strategy.
So, the Fed is not an
enforcement agency. That wasn't
our call. So, the Department of
Justice, the strategy they
followed, at least initially,
was to go after institutions and
to penalize the big banks
billions of dollars for their
misbehavior.
And my reaction to that was
that, you know, corporations are
legal fictions. They don't
themselves take legal or illegal
actions. It's individuals who
make those decisions.
And I would have preferred to
have seen the strategy been to
go and determine who -- what
individuals were responsible.
And then we would have found out
more, I think, and maybe
been more accountable that way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But that wasn't
done. Do you believe you know
who should have been held
responsible, the individuals?
BEN BERNANKE: No, I don't.
I mean, at least be
investigated. We saw some cases
where people have gone to jail
for market
rigging and other kinds of
blatant things. But it's a fine
line in finance between being
reckless and irresponsible and
breaking the law. And I think
those situations needed to
be investigated.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Aside from the
executives at the big banks,
just in terms of ordinary
Americans,
people who go about their daily
lives, you hear so much
conversation today about how,
yes, the economy is growing
again, yes, it's come back in
many ways we measure, but still
people express a feeling of
anxiety, of worry that the
economy hasn't taken off, it
hasn't
soared the way it did before.
How do you -- what do you say to
people who are out there and
still feeling very insecure?
BEN BERNANKE: Well, one of the
issues is that the economy isn't
serving the whole public,
the whole population equally.
I mean, obviously, a lot of the
benefit of the growth and
recovery has gone to the upper
-- more upper-income class. And
that was, in some sense,
predictable, because we have
been seeing greater inequality
across the population for now
30, 35 years, at least.
It's a very long-term trend.
It's a very difficult trend to
correct. I don't think it has
much to do with the Fed
or the financial crisis. It's
just a very long-term trend that
arises from globalization,
from technical change, from
insufficient skills. So, it's
understandable.
I mean, I understand exactly
what the concern is, but it's
not something that the Fed
really
had much control over.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The last thing I
want to ask you about is
Congress. You do refer in the
book to dealing with members of
Congress, being frustrated, in
many cases, because they
were telling you behind the
scenes that they were
supportive, but in public they
weren't
able to do that, frustration
about ideology.
Today, we, of course, see the
big development among House
Republicans not able to agree
on their new leadership. How do
you see the Congress? Is it --
and this sense of ideology,
in your view, going to stand in
the way of what's in the best
interest for the country,
whether it's far
left or far right?
BEN BERNANKE: Yes,
I think it could.
Ideology leads to talking points
and allegiances, and that, in
turn, kind of blocks out subtle
discussions of complicated
issues. It blocks out
cooperation across the aisle,
working
together to solve problems.
I'm hopeful that, you know, as
we move forward, that more
politicians will look to the
center
and look to try to work across
the aisle to address some of the
real serious issues, including
the one of inequality
that you raised.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
think the cost of this is?
BEN BERNANKE: Well, it means
that our political system is
paralyzed, and some important
steps
that could be -- make our
economy stronger, and more
efficient and more equitable
will
not get taken, or at least
not get taken a while.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
consequence of that is, things
don't get done.
BEN BERNANKE: It's a little bit
self-reinforcing, because, if
these things don't get done,
then
the public becomes even more
disillusioned, and that feeds
back into extreme and partisan
politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Ben
Bernanke, there is much more to
talk to you about. The book is
really a remarkable one, looking
at your life and your
experiences at the Fed. It's
"The
Courage to Act: A Memoir of a
Crisis and Its Aftermath."
Ben Bernanke, we thank you.
BEN BERNANKE: Well, thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: As we just heard
from Ben Bernanke, one of the
central concerns people bring up
about the economy is inequality
and the lack of social mobility.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, has long been
reporting on those issues. And,
tonight, he explores the role
of behavior in all of this.
It's part of our weekly series
Making Sense, which airs every
Thursday on the "NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: So how
does this game work?
AKIHIRO NISHI, Yale University:
So in front of you now, you have
a tablet.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
Akihiro Nishi is prepping me to
play an economic inequality game
at Yale University's Human
Nature Lab. In the game, each
player is at the center of a
small group within the larger
community. And in each round of
the game, without knowing what
the others are doing,
we choose either to cooperate,
that is donate 50 units, which
automatically double, to each
of the others in our group, or
to defect and not donate to
anyone, just take from those
who cooperate.
The game is designed to explore
the human behaviors that fuel
economic inequality, a
hot political issue for several
years now, which Senator Bernie
Sanders has made the
centerpiece of his
presidential campaign.
As he told Judy Woodruff in May:
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
Ninety-nine percent of all new
income is going
to the top 1 percent. The top
one-10th of 1 percent owns
almost as much wealth as the
bottom 90 percent. That is
immoral and unsustainable.
PAUL SOLMAN: Back in the Human
Nature Lab, it was time to
recruit players online.
AKIHIRO NISHI: If you will look
behind you for a moment, you
will see now the job is
actually posted, and all these
people are joining from all over
the world.
PAUL SOLMAN: And so
here I have 200.
AKIHIRO NISHI: Right.
PAUL SOLMAN: In the game.
We'd each been assigned a
certain amount of wealth. The
distribution mimicked the degree
of inequality in the U.S.
And I have four other players
with 200, and I have one player
with 1,150. Where did this
guy come from, Silicon Valley?
AKIHIRO NISHI: Maybe.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, round one,
first decision, give each fellow
player 50 of my units, so
they get 100, and hope that they
do the same for me, or defect,
keep my cash and rake it
in from any who chose to share.
So, I just go like that, right?
I cooperated.
There we go.
Risky, since, with five fellow
players, 50 units apiece put me
50 in the hole.
So, did my neighbors cooperate?
Come on, guys.
AKIHIRO NISHI: Let's see.
PAUL SOLMAN: Oh, look, so three
of them came back, so I'm up to
250.
Somewhat subverting my faith in
human kindness, however, two
players had defected, including
the fat cat who'd started out at
1,150 and now had 1,550. Thus,
the gap between fat cat
and the rest had grown,
reflecting the trend outside
this room that we have been
covering
for years now.
Laid-off middle manager Denise
Barrant was losing her home in
foreclosure, a case study
in downward mobility.
DENISE BARRANT, Homeowner: The
top 1 percent is living well,
and they don't get it. They
don't get what is happening to
this country. And I feel like
we're creating a Third World
country subculture
within this country.
PAUL SOLMAN: At the Human Nature
Lab, Nick Christakis studies
inequality and the key
questions it raises.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS, Yale
University: Does inequality
retard economic growth? Does it
affect whether we connect
to other people?
PAUL SOLMAN: How happy we are.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: Or how
happy we are or how healthy we
are?
PAUL SOLMAN: And there's plenty
of evidence that extreme
inequality affects all these
things negatively.
As Berkeley psychologist
Dacher Keltner told us:
DACHER KELTNER, University of
California, Berkeley: No matter
how you look at it, the
effects of inequality are
pernicious upon things like
bullying on school playgrounds,
the quality of your physical
health, how you handle disease.
PAUL SOLMAN: That's
for those below.
Under Keltner's aegis, post-doc
fellow Paul Piff ran a rafter of
peer-reviewed studies
on those atop the economy. Turns
out people with fancier cars
were more likely to run
crosswalks where pedestrians
waited. The more money they had,
the more people helped
themselves
to candy meant for children,
cheated in a game of chance,
even spent more time primping
in a mirror.
PAUL PIFF, University of
California, Berkeley: I ran a
study where I asked thousands of
people
to tell me, is It moral to step
on another person to get ahead?
My wealthiest participants
were way more likely to believe
that greed and self-interest is
a moral and good thing.
PAUL SOLMAN: This guy, I'm
definitely cutting him.
No wonder, then, that when given
the choice at the end of each
round whether to keep or
cut ties with a few other
players, I was eager to banish
rich defectors. He's got 3,600.
And I am resentful of people who
have a lot of money and aren't
willing to share. That's
for sure.
Meanwhile, I was sticking to my
default strategy, in this game,
as in life.
I'm going to say, yes,
I cooperate again.
Cooperation, and, ever so
encouragingly, winning converts
to the high road.
Ah, look at that. I'm up to 750
now, and everybody is a
cooperator.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is fantastic.
Now we're all getting wealthy.
I'm actually one of the
wealth -- well no, not really.
AKIHIRO NISHI: No, still
around the bottom.
PAUL SOLMAN: All right, you
don't have to -- don't rub it
in, Akihiro.
But rub it in, he and Professor
Christakis did, because the
first major finding after
running the game
hundreds of times?
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: The poor
stayed poor and the rich stayed
rich.
PAUL SOLMAN: But it's not as if
the game's less-well-off aren't,
like I was, trying.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: The poor
people are generally trying to
cooperate and are trying to
invest
in their neighbors to
acquire wealth themselves.
PAUL SOLMAN: And that's as in
the real world. That is, poorer
people do give more as a
percentage
of their wealth to
other people, right?
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS:
Yes. That's correct.
PAUL SOLMAN: Maybe because of a
greater need for empathy, as
documented by this Berkeley
study gauging response
to a sad hospital video.
CHILD: I'm 12 years old, and I
have neuroblastoma, and I have
been fighting it for seven
years.
PAUL SOLMAN: Lower-income
subjects not only reported more
compassion. Their vital signs
indicated they really meant it.
Compassion and its corollary,
cooperation, is a coping
strategy, says psychologist Rudy
Mendoza-Denton, because, without
wealth, what can poor people
count on?
RUDY MENDOZA-DENTON,
Psychologist: Their friends,
their family, their community.
PAUL SOLMAN: And back in the
lab, my cooperation strategy
seemed to be working wonders.
Oh, look, everybody's...
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Everybody is
cooperating with me. I'm up to
1,650.
AKIHIRO NISHI: OK.
PAUL SOLMAN: But, if you always
cooperate, you're liable to be a
sitting duck.
Look at that.
AKIHIRO NISHI: What happened?
PAUL SOLMAN: Four of them
defected. Moreover, I am
noticing something disturbing,
which
is that the defectors all have
more money than the cooperators.
AKIHIRO NISHI: Right,
including you.
PAUL SOLMAN: And thus the
experiment's second major
finding:
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: It wasn't
inequality, per se, that was so
bad for society, but the
visibility that was a problem.
Visibility encouraged the rich
to take advantage of their
neighbors and created a kind
of exploitation scenario.
PAUL SOLMAN: But in some
versions of this game, players
didn't know how much others
had.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: In the
societies in which we concealed
individual wealth, those
societies
were wealthier in the end, more
cooperative and more friendly.
PAUL SOLMAN: And so, if
visibility of wealth makes the
rich more aggressive,
exacerbating
inequality, the policy
implications with regard to,
say, executive pay, seem, in the
end,
pretty ironic.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: What it
suggests is that in firms where
everyone makes about the same
amount of money, you should open
it up and make pay very
transparent. Increase
visibility,
that will increase cooperation
between people, increase
economic growth, our experiments
would suggest, and increase
social connections.
Conversely, if there's high
levels of inequality and the CEO
makes five hundred times what
a line worker...
(CROSSTALK)
PAUL SOLMAN: Hide it.
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: Hide it.
(LAUGHTER)
NICHOLAS CHRISTAKIS: Because, if
you make it visible, it has the
opposite effect.
PAUL SOLMAN: This is economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
reporting, somewhat dejectedly,
from New Haven, Connecticut.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
online: A new program in
Albuquerque, New Mexico, is
helping low-wage workers by
providing mentoring and tutoring
for their children. It's part
of a citywide effort to improve
graduation rates, and it seems
to be working. Read about
that from our partners
at The Hechinger Report.
And today is National Poetry
Day, so we asked you to tweet us
a haiku. We gathered several
of those, including
"NewsHour"-themed haikus, which
you can read on our home page.
All that and more is on our
Web site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And tune in later tonight on
"Charlie Rose": republican
presidential candidate Ben
Carson.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and right here
again tomorrow evening with Mark
Shields and David Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you, and good
night.